---
layout: post
title:  "Principles of object-oriented programming"
date:   2024-04-01
categories: programming, newsletter
---
Years ago, when I was in university, I had trouble understanding object-oriented programming. Interestingly, I found a clear and understandable description of OOP principles in a short paragraph in a PHP book, and it helped me a lot to better understand and clearly articulate my explanation of the principles. I have since searched the internet several times over the years and I see confusion around the explanation of the "pillars" of OOP. Here I share my understanding in a clear, concise and understandable explanation of the four principles of OOP.

### Principles of object-oriented programming
#### 1. Encapsulation
Encapsulation is the principle of protecting data within an object from unintended changes by restricting direct access to it, while providing well-defined methods for interacting with the data, thus maintaining the object's integrity. 
#### 2. Polymorphism
Polymorphism is the ability of methods to respond to commands and data in different ways as well as the ability of a method to process objects of different types without any change. 
#### 3. Inheritance
Inheritance is the ability of a type (child class) to inherit and reuse the properties and methods as well as the interface of another type (parent class) as if those methods and attributes were its own.
#### 4. Abstraction
Abstraction is the principle of hiding implementation details behind a simplified and meaningful interface, allowing users to interact with complex systems in a manageable way.